README.md, before:

# Train or Finetune the AudioLDM model

## Content of this repo

1. Training: The training of AudioLDM model, also with VAE model training code.
2. Evaluation: The code for evaluation on the AudioCaps dataset. Result saved as json files. Evaluation metrics including FAD, KL, IS, etc.
3. Preprocessed Audiocaps dataset and checkpoints.

## Prepare running environment
```shell 
# Create conda environment
conda create -n audioldm_train python=3.10
conda activate audioldm_train
# Clone the repo
git clone https://github.com/haoheliu/AudioLDM-training-finetuning.git; cd AudioLDM-training-finetuning
# Install running environment
pip install poetry
poetry install
```

## Download checkpoints and dataset
1. Download checkpoints from Google Drive: [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1pGw9T80YjU-Q-W4pd8c1hqJlauMIEdAm/view?usp=sharing).
2. Uncompress the checkpoint tar file and place the content into **data/checkpoints/**
3. Download the preprocessed AudioCaps from Google Drive: [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/16J1CVu7EZPD_22FxitZ0TpOd__FwzOmx/view?usp=sharing)
4. Similarly, uncompress the dataset tar file and place the content into **data/dataset**

To double check if dataset or checkpoints are ready, run the following command:
```shell
python3 tests/validate_dataset_checkpoint.py
```
If the structure is not correct or partly missing. You will see the error message.

## Train the AudioLDM model
```python
# Train the AudioLDM (latent diffusion part)
python3 audioldm_train/train/latent_diffusion.py -c audioldm_train/config/2023_08_23_reproduce_audioldm/audioldm_original.yaml

# Train the VAE
python3 audioldm_train/train/autoencoder.py -c audioldm_train/config/2023_11_13_vae_autoencoder/16k_64.yaml
```

The program will perform generation on the evaluation set every 15 epochs of training. After obtaining the audio generation folders (named val_<training-steps>), you can proceed to the next step for model evaluation.

## Evaluate the model output
Automatically evaluation based on each of the folder with generated audio
```python

# Evaluate all existing generated folder
python3 audioldm_train/eval.py --log_path all

# Evaluate only a specific experiment folder
python3 audioldm_train/eval.py --log_path <path-to-the-experiment-folder>
```
The evaluation result will be saved in a json file at the same level of the audio folder.

## Inference with the pretrained model
Use the following syntax:

```shell
python3 audioldm_train/infer.py --config_yaml <The-path-to-the-same-config-file-you-use-for-training> --list_inference <the-filelist-you-want-to-generate>
```

For example:
```shell
# Please make sure you have train the model using audioldm_crossattn_flant5.yaml
# The generated audio will be saved at the same log folder if the pretrained model.
python3 audioldm_train/infer.py --config_yaml audioldm_train/config/2023_08_23_reproduce_audioldm/audioldm_crossattn_flant5.yaml --list_inference tests/captionlist/inference_test.lst
```
The generated audio will be named with the caption by default. If you like to specify the filename to use, please checkout the format of *tests/captionlist/inference_test_with_filename.lst*.

This repo only support inference with the model you trained by yourself. If you want to use the pretrained model directly, please use these two repos: [AudioLDM](https://github.com/haoheliu/AudioLDM) and [AudioLDM2](https://github.com/haoheliu/AudioLDM2).

## Train the model using your own dataset
Super easy, simply follow these steps:

1. Prepare the metadata with the same format as the provided AudioCaps dataset. 
2. Register in the metadata of your dataset in **data/dataset/metadata/dataset_root.json**
3. Use your dataset in the YAML file.

You do not need to resample or pre-segment the audiofile. The dataloader will handle this part.

## Cite this work
If you found this tool useful, please consider citing

```bibtex
@article{liu2023audioldm,
  title={{AudioLDM}: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models},
  author={Liu, Haohe and Chen, Zehua and Yuan, Yi and Mei, Xinhao and Liu, Xubo and Mandic, Danilo and Wang, Wenwu and Plumbley, Mark D},
  journal={Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning},
  year={2023}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{liu2023audioldm2,
  title={{AudioLDM 2}: Learning Holistic Audio Generation with Self-supervised Pretraining},
  author={Haohe Liu and Qiao Tian and Yi Yuan and Xubo Liu and Xinhao Mei and Qiuqiang Kong and Yuping Wang and Wenwu Wang and Yuxuan Wang and Mark D. Plumbley},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05734},
  year={2023}
}
```

Commit message:

add support for model finetuning

README.md, after:

[![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-2301.12503-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12503) [![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-2308.05734-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.05734)

# Train or Finetune the AudioLDM model

This repo includes: 

1. Training: The training of AudioLDM model, also with VAE model training code.
2. Evaluation: The code for evaluation on the AudioCaps dataset. Result saved as json files. Evaluation metrics including FAD, KL, IS, etc.
3. Inference: Inference your trained AudioLDM model with the caption list you specified.
3. Preprocessed Audiocaps dataset and checkpoints (you need to download them from google drived as shown below).


# Prepare Python running environment

```shell 
# Create conda environment
conda create -n audioldm_train python=3.10
conda activate audioldm_train
# Clone the repo
git clone https://github.com/haoheliu/AudioLDM-training-finetuning.git; cd AudioLDM-training-finetuning
# Install running environment
pip install poetry
poetry install
```

## Download checkpoints and dataset
1. Download checkpoints from Google Drive: [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1pGw9T80YjU-Q-W4pd8c1hqJlauMIEdAm/view?usp=sharing).
2. Uncompress the checkpoint tar file and place the content into **data/checkpoints/**
3. Download the preprocessed AudioCaps from Google Drive: [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/16J1CVu7EZPD_22FxitZ0TpOd__FwzOmx/view?usp=sharing)
4. Similarly, uncompress the dataset tar file and place the content into **data/dataset**

To double check if dataset or checkpoints are ready, run the following command:
```shell
python3 tests/validate_dataset_checkpoint.py
```
If the structure is not correct or partly missing. You will see the error message.

# Play around with the code

## Train the AudioLDM model
```python
# Train the AudioLDM (latent diffusion part)
python3 audioldm_train/train/latent_diffusion.py -c audioldm_train/config/2023_08_23_reproduce_audioldm/audioldm_original.yaml

# Train the VAE
python3 audioldm_train/train/autoencoder.py -c audioldm_train/config/2023_11_13_vae_autoencoder/16k_64.yaml
```

The program will perform generation on the evaluation set every 15 epochs of training. After obtaining the audio generation folders (named val_<training-steps>), you can proceed to the next step for model evaluation.

## Finetuning of the pretrained model

You can finetune with two pretrained checkpoint, first download the one that you like (e.g., using wget):
1. Medium size AudioLDM: https://zenodo.org/records/7884686/files/audioldm-m-full.ckpt
2. Small size AudioLDM: https://zenodo.org/records/7884686/files/audioldm-s-full
Place the checkpoint in the *data/checkpoints* folder

Then perform finetuning with one of the following commands:
```shell
# Medium size AudioLDM
python3 audioldm_train/train/latent_diffusion.py -c audioldm_train/config/2023_08_23_reproduce_audioldm/audioldm_original_medium.yaml --reload_from_ckpt data/checkpoints/audioldm-m-full.ckpt

# Small size AudioLDM
python3 audioldm_train/train/latent_diffusion.py -c audioldm_train/config/2023_08_23_reproduce_audioldm/audioldm_original.yaml --reload_from_ckpt data/checkpoints/audioldm-s-full
```
You can specify your own dataset following the same format as the provided AudioCaps dataset.

## Evaluate the model output
Automatically evaluation based on each of the folder with generated audio
```python

# Evaluate all existing generated folder
python3 audioldm_train/eval.py --log_path all

# Evaluate only a specific experiment folder
python3 audioldm_train/eval.py --log_path <path-to-the-experiment-folder>
```
The evaluation result will be saved in a json file at the same level of the audio folder.

## Inference with the pretrained model
Use the following syntax:

```shell
python3 audioldm_train/infer.py --config_yaml <The-path-to-the-same-config-file-you-use-for-training> --list_inference <the-filelist-you-want-to-generate>
```

For example:
```shell
# Please make sure you have train the model using audioldm_crossattn_flant5.yaml
# The generated audio will be saved at the same log folder if the pretrained model.
python3 audioldm_train/infer.py --config_yaml audioldm_train/config/2023_08_23_reproduce_audioldm/audioldm_crossattn_flant5.yaml --list_inference tests/captionlist/inference_test.lst
```
The generated audio will be named with the caption by default. If you like to specify the filename to use, please checkout the format of *tests/captionlist/inference_test_with_filename.lst*.

This repo only support inference with the model you trained by yourself. If you want to use the pretrained model directly, please use these two repos: [AudioLDM](https://github.com/haoheliu/AudioLDM) and [AudioLDM2](https://github.com/haoheliu/AudioLDM2).

## Train the model using your own dataset
Super easy, simply follow these steps:

1. Prepare the metadata with the same format as the provided AudioCaps dataset. 
2. Register in the metadata of your dataset in **data/dataset/metadata/dataset_root.json**
3. Use your dataset in the YAML file.

You do not need to resample or pre-segment the audiofile. The dataloader will handle this part.

# Cite this work
If you found this tool useful, please consider citing

```bibtex
@article{liu2023audioldm,
  title={{AudioLDM}: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models},
  author={Liu, Haohe and Chen, Zehua and Yuan, Yi and Mei, Xinhao and Liu, Xubo and Mandic, Danilo and Wang, Wenwu and Plumbley, Mark D},
  journal={Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning},
  year={2023}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{liu2023audioldm2,
  title={{AudioLDM 2}: Learning Holistic Audio Generation with Self-supervised Pretraining},
  author={Haohe Liu and Qiao Tian and Yi Yuan and Xubo Liu and Xinhao Mei and Qiuqiang Kong and Yuping Wang and Wenwu Wang and Yuxuan Wang and Mark D. Plumbley},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05734},
  year={2023}
}
```
